OEP-45 :: ADR-002: Deploying Open edX on Kubernetes Using Helm (#372)
openedx/open-edx-proposals: oeps/architectural-decisions/oep-0045/decisions/0002-helm-for-multi-instance-k8s.rst

As the needs and deployment scale of Open edX operators can vary significantly, the Helm charts will be designed to be flexible, incorporating sensible defaults but allowing customization of almost every aspect of the deployment. This includes supporting various cloud providers and different underlying technologies for Kubernetes ressources. E.g. Ingress controllers.

The goal is for these Helm charts to be developed and maintained collaboratively, by the Open edX Operators that are using them. All relevant best practices from both the Open edX and Helm projects should be followed from the start, such as `OEP-55 Project Maintainers`_.

.. _OEP-55 Project Maintainers: https://open-edx-proposals.readthedocs.io/en/latest/processes/oep-0055-proc-project-maintainers.html
.. _Helm Charts: https://helm.sh/

Consequences
************

Helm Considerations
===================

Helm is the best known package manager for Kubernetes. It's status as a graduated project from the Cloud Native Computing Foundation is a clear indication of the thriving adoption, open governance and commitment to the open community.

> Helm makes it possible to packages and publish charts, which can be rendered as kubernetes manifests. This charts provide robust support for versioning, deployment and rollback. At the same time Helm makes it easy for operators to customize application configurations during deployment and for developers to provide sensible defaults.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Helm makes it possible to package and publish charts, which can be rendered as kubernetes manifests. These charts provide robust support for versioning, deployment and rollback. At the same time Helm makes it easy for operators to customize application configurations during deployment and for developers to provide sensible defaults.
```

> Charts are build with the Go language templating engine which is a drawback since it means adding a new language to the ecosystem with a new learning curve. This is considered acceptable due to the large adoption of Helm in the devops community.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Charts are built with the Go language templating engine.  This is a drawback, since it means adding a new language to the ecosystem with a new learning curve. Nevertheless, this is considered acceptable due to the large adoption of Helm in the devops community.
```

The recommendations above are heavily inspired by the following resources:

* https://helm.sh/docs/chart_best_practices/

Alternatives Considered
***********************

Building more Kubernetes support into Tutor
===========================================

Enhancing the current support for tutor core was not considered since it would go against one of the goals of the project as `explained by the author`_.

.. _explained by the author: https://github.com/overhangio/tutor/pull/675#issuecomment-1140919654

Custom Templating tool
======================

A `custom templating tool`_ built as a tutor plugin and leveraging kustomize for extension was demonstrated and considered as a possible alternative. It was ultimately rejected as Helm would provide more flexibility in extension without the need of maintenance.

.. _custom templating tool: https://github.com/eduNEXT/drydock

Implementation Strategy
***********************

Once this ADR has reached Provisional status:

1. A new repository will be created on GitHub, e.g. at https://github.com/openedx/openedx-helm-charts
2. The authors of this ADR will create a roadmap using GitHub Issues by defining the initial development issues.

> 3. Invite interested parties to become core contributors on the repo, and nominate some of them.

Reviewer: Should we name the maintainer of the repository in this OEP?

Either way, who will be the maintainer of the repository? :)

Reviewer 2: So far we agreed this will use the  best practices from OEP-55.

This means among other things that we should add a `catalog-info.yaml` file in the repo. Making a PR now.

Reviewer 2: The PR is at https://github.com/openedx/tutor-contrib-multi/pull/16 but it will require an update once the repo changes names.

Does this solve your concern @arbrandes? If so, I'd be ready to merge this PR.

In the meantime I'lll rebase, fix the commit lint check and change the status in the file.

Reviewer: @felipemontoya, works for me, thanks!

Deploying Open edX on Kubernetes Using Helm
###########################################

Status
******

Provisional

Context
*******

For most of the history of the Open edX project, production deployments were done primarily using Virtual Machines that had been provisioned using the ansible scripts in the ``edx/configuration`` repository. With the adoption of the `decision 0001`_ from OEP-0045 that selects Tutor as the replacement for ``edx/configuration`` some large instances and operators are encountering use cases that are not supported. Multiple instances of Open edX sharing some infrastructure is the first of such cases.

> A popular way to deploy containerized applications is to use `Kubernetes`_. However, Kubernetes has a lot of complexity so the overhead it brings is usually not worthwhile for small, singe-instance deployments. For that reason (as explained in OEP-45) as well as a general lack of experience with Kubernetes, to date there has been no officially recommended way to deploy Open edX on Kubernetes. Although Tutor does include basic support for Kubernetes, it is focused only on a basic working deployment, and lacks the flexibility and capability that operators require for large, multi-instance deployments.

Reviewer 3: Regarding:

> large, multi-instance

Do you think this initiative would also be useful to an organization with large, single-instance deployments? In particular, I am thinking of 2U and edx.org. (@jmbowman)

.. _Kubernetes: https://kubernetes.io/
.. _Deploying multiple Open edX instances onto a Kubernetes Cluster with Tutor: https://discuss.openedx.org/t/tech-talk-demo-deploying-multiple-open-edx-instances-onto-a-kubernetes-cluster-with-tutor/4641
.. _decision 0001: https://open-edx-proposals.readthedocs.io/en/latest/architectural-decisions/oep-0045/decisions/0001-tutor-as-replacement-for-edx-configuration.html

Decision
********

For Open edX operators who wish to deploy Open edX on Kubernetes, community-maintained `Helm Charts`_ will be used to simplify the process of deploying a kubernetes cluster capable of loading one or more Open edX instances.

> Building on top of the `decision 0001`_ those single instances will in turn be managed by Tutor and the Tutor plugin ecosystem.

Reviewer 3: Just to check my understanding, the implication here is that we will _not_ use to Tutor render Helm charts from Jinja2 templates, right? If so, I am glad to hear that. Templates-rendering-templates sounds a bit too much like the edx/configuration for my comfort.

Author: Yes, the idea is to use Helm charts (with no involvement of Tutor) to deploy shared resources onto the cluster (load balancing with HTTPS, logging, monitoring, autoscaling, ES, Redis, _maybe_ MySQL etc. too). And then once that cluster is provisioned, another workflow (which may vary per provider and is out of scope of this project for now) will use Tutor to build Open edX images and deploy instances onto the cluster using those images.

Wherever possible we want to use k8s primitives so that instances are "auto-detected" as they get deployed - e.g. each instance deploys K8S `Ingress` objects so that the central load balancer detects the deployment and provisions HTTPS certs and starts routing traffic automatically. Where this is not possible, a tutor plugin or init script will be used to do things like provision database users in the shared database as each instance is deployed.
